# PhD_Chapter_4-Mosquito_ABM
This repository contains scripts and files involved in creating the ABM described in Chapter 4 of my PhD dissertation:

#### Dawson, Daniel. 2016. Exploring the effects of environmental characteristics and anthropogenic activities on mosquito populations: an experimental and spatially explicit model-based approach. PhD Dissertation. Texas Tech University. Lubbock, Texas. USA.

The basic premise of the model is that mosquitoes have two main life history phases, including an aquatic stage (egg-pupae) and a terrestrial adult phase. In the aquatic stage, the stressors that mosquito larvae experience are likely to be similar within the same aquatic environment. In contrast, since adults are highly dispersive, the stressors they experience are likely to be determined by where they move to in the world. This difference in exploited in the model by modeling both phases differently, but simultaneously. The aquatic phases of mosquitoes are modeled by leslie matrix models run in program R. Meanwhile, the adult phase modeled via an individual-based model in NetLogo. The Rpackage RNetLogo  interface between the two programs, and allows for interaction between them. In the model, individual adults move around a grid-based world in NetLogo, and deposit eggs into discrete wetlands in the landscape. When this occurs, their eggs are moved into matrix models in program R. As time elapses, the matrix models produce more adults, which then emerge from the wetlands back into the NetLogo world. Because vital rates of aquatic stages can be controlled on a per wetland basis, and adult vital rates and movement can be affected by habitat differences in the NetLogo world, this model structure explicitly allows for the influential of spatial heterogeneity on population dynamics  
In the current model, the aquatic phase uses survival and development rates that were derived from experimental data, and the IBM largely uses values from literature sources. In addition, the NetLogo world uses imagery of Lubbock County, Texas imported in an ascii format to determine patch values. For a full description of the model, see the doctoral thesis by Dawson (2016). Although the model was designed to simulate population dynamics of C. tarsalis mosquitoes, it could potentially be generalized to model any number of organisms with amphibious life histories.    

This model operates with two R scripts and one NetLogo model. The first script sets up the NetLogo model, generates the code blocks necessary to create Leslie matrices for each wetland simulated in the model, and determines the vital rates for mosquitoes in those wetlands. The second script loads the code generated by the first script into a function that also controls the model output. The function in the second script allows for multiple model runs. 

## Main Files
There are three main files including:
MosquitoModel_11_3_2016_Generalized_for_Distribution.nlogo: The Netlogo model
SetupScript_MosquitoModel_RNetlogo: The first control script. This script sets up population matrices for each playa lake. 
MultipleRun_parallelprocessing_1_22_17: The second control script. This script sets up and controls the simulation. There are also functions to process the outputs.  

## Auxilary files
The NetLogo model requires several auxiliary files to run, including landcover, projection, and playa locations. 
These files include:
hd_km2_120_ascii_3.asc
lubbock_landcover_clipped_to_boundary_wgs1984_ascii.asc
lubbock_landcover_wgs1984_ascii
lubbock_nwis_08_07_20ag_prob_raster_ascii
lubbock_nwis_08_07_20ag_prob_raster_centers_ascii
Lubbock_roads_WGS1984 shape file
WGS_84_Geographic.prj
US_Orthographic.prj
VZL_trap_locations_ascii.asc: this file is optional, but provides locations for individuals to be "seeded" at the begining of the model for evaluation purposes
